.TH PERSISTD 1 "2026-07-15" "PersistShell 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
persistd \- run the PersistShell per-user daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B persistd
.RI [ help | version ]
.br
.B persistd foreground
.RI [ --idle-timeout " " DURATION ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B persistd
owns the per-user public Unix socket, session metadata, reconciliation, and
client coordination.  A single per-user \fBpersist-holder\fR owns PTY masters,
bounded replay buffers, and session output writers.  Normally both are managed
through \fBpersist daemon start\fR.
Run it directly only for foreground operation and diagnostics.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B help
Show daemon help.  Use this form instead of appending \fB--help\fR to
\fBforeground\fR.
.TP
.B version
Show the daemon version.
.TP
.B foreground [\fB--idle-timeout\fR \fIDURATION\fR]
Run the daemon in the foreground.  \fIDURATION\fR accepts the configured
duration syntax, such as \fB30s\fR, \fB5m\fR, or \fB1h\fR.  When nonzero, the
daemon periodically removes idle, unlocked, unattached sessions.
.SH RUNTIME
The daemon holds a single-instance PID lock in
.IR /run/user/$UID/persistshell/daemon.pid
and listens on
.IR /run/user/$UID/persistshell/persist.sock
by default.  It uses the same configuration and XDG directory resolution as
.BR persist (1).
Release builds start the internal Holder only from
.IR /usr/libexec/persistshell/persist-holder ;
they do not resolve it through \fBPATH\fR or \fBPERSIST_HOLDER_PATH\fR.
.SH SIGNALS
.B SIGTERM
requests a graceful shutdown.  The daemon removes its socket and PID file
when its foreground loop exits.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/persistshell/config.toml
User configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/persistshell/metadata.db
Persistent session metadata.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/persistshell/sessions/
Session output logs by default.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/persistshell/daemon.log
Daemon log by default.
.TP
.I /usr/libexec/persistshell/persist-holder
Fixed release installation path for the internal per-user PTY Holder.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Zero indicates success.  Invalid arguments and daemon startup or runtime
errors exit with status 2.
.SH SECURITY
The daemon is per-user.  Its runtime directory is mode 0700 and its socket,
logs, and metadata are restricted to the owning user.  Do not expose the
runtime directory to other users.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR persist (1),
.I /usr/share/doc/persistshell/CONFIG.md
