.TH PERSIST 1 "2026-07-15" "PersistShell 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
persist \- manage persistent interactive shell sessions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B persist
.RI [ help ]
.br
.B persist
.I command
.RI [ arguments ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B persist
is the PersistShell client.  It connects to the per-user
.BR persistd (1)
daemon over a Unix socket and manages interactive shell sessions.
The shell runtime is released when the shell exits; persisted metadata,
output, working directory, and the restricted recovery environment remain
available for a later recovery attach.
Allowed exported variables and explicit unsets are restored for Closed
sessions.  Terminal, SSH, display, and agent variables come from the current
attach and are not persisted.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B help
Show command help.  This is also the behavior with no arguments.
.TP
.B version
Show the client version.
.TP
.B doctor
Check local configuration and runtime prerequisites.  When the daemon is
running, report Holder connection, PID and instance, degraded output logs,
and lost sessions.  A disconnected Holder or nonzero degraded/lost count is
reported as unhealthy.
.TP
.B config [show]
Print the effective configuration.
.TP
.B daemon {start|stop|status}
Start, stop, or report the per-user daemon.  Status includes Holder connection,
PID and instance plus degraded-log and lost-session totals when metrics are
available.
.TP
.B new
Create a session without attaching to it.
.TP
.B attach [\fIID\fR] [\fB-r\fR|\fB--readonly\fR]
Attach to an existing session.  Without an ID, create and attach to a new
session.  A writable attach takes the active writer role from any prior
writer; readonly attaches receive output but cannot send input.
.TP
.B ls [\fIID\fR] [\fB--plain\fR] [\fB-t\fR|\fB--tag\fR \fITAG\fR]
List sessions.  On a terminal, select a session to view newest-first shell
command history, attach, return to the list, or quit.  An ID opens that session
directly.  Non-terminal output and \fB--plain\fR retain the table-only form.
.TP
.B ps \fIID\fR
Show the foreground process tree for a session.
.TP
.B stats \fIID\fR
Show resource counters for the foreground process.
.TP
.B snapshot \fIID\fR
Print a bounded JSON snapshot that excludes environment values, input, note
text, tag text, and SSH agent paths.
.TP
.B metrics
Print bounded daemon and session aggregate metrics as JSON.
.TP
.B top
Open the interactive performance dashboard.  This command requires a terminal.
Use j/k or arrow keys to select, Enter for details, s to change sorting, r to
change the trend range, Escape to return, and q or Ctrl-C to exit.
.TP
.B close \fIID\fR
Close a session gracefully.
.TP
.B kill \fIID\fR
Terminate a session.
.TP
.B detach \fIID\fR
Disconnect the active client from a session.
.TP
.B log \fIID\fR
Print a session output log.
.TP
.B log export \fIID\fR [\fB-o\fR|\fB--output\fR \fIPATH\fR]
Export a session output log to standard output or a file.
.TP
.B log search \fIKEYWORD\fR [\fB-s\fR|\fB--session\fR \fIID\fR] [\fB-i\fR|\fB--ignore-case\fR]
Search session logs.
.TP
.B replay \fIID\fR [\fB-t\fR|\fB--tail\fR \fIN\fR] [\fB-h\fR|\fB--head\fR \fIN\fR] [\fB-s\fR|\fB--speed\fR \fIFACTOR\fR] [\fB-f\fR|\fB--follow\fR]
Replay recorded output.
.TP
.B rename \fIID\fR \fINAME\fR
Rename a session.
.TP
.B note \fIID\fR [\fITEXT\fR]
Read a note, set it, or clear it with an empty text argument.
.TP
.B tag \fIID\fR {add|remove|list} [\fITAG\fR]
Manage session tags.
.TP
.B pin|\fBunpin|\fBlock|\fBunlock \fIID\fR
Change a session's pin or lock state.  A locked session rejects attach and
kill until it is unlocked.
.TP
.B install
Install the interactive SSH shell hook.
.TP
.B uninstall [\fB--purge\fR]
Remove the shell hook.  The optional purge also removes PersistShell data.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PERSIST_DISABLE
When nonempty, the installed SSH hook bypasses PersistShell.
.TP
.BR HOME ,
.BR XDG_CONFIG_HOME ,
.BR XDG_DATA_HOME ,
.BR XDG_STATE_HOME ,
.BR XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
Set the per-user configuration, data, state, and runtime locations.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/persistshell/config.toml
User configuration.
.TP
.I /etc/persistshell/config.toml
System configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/persistshell/
Metadata, session output, and history by default.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/persistshell/
Client and daemon logs by default.
.TP
.I /run/user/$UID/persistshell/persist.sock
Default per-user daemon socket.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Zero indicates success.  The client uses 1 for invalid user input, 2 for
environment or configuration failures, 3 for I/O or system call failures, 4
for protocol failures, and 5 for internal failures.
.SH SECURITY
The socket and runtime directory are per-user.  PersistShell does not record
terminal input by default.  Output can still contain secrets printed by
programs.  Use \fBPERSIST_DISABLE=1 ssh host\fR or
\fBssh host 'bash --noprofile --norc'\fR to bypass the shell hook.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR persistd (1),
.I /usr/share/doc/persistshell/COMMANDS.md,
.I /usr/share/doc/persistshell/CONFIG.md
